https://www.reddit.com/r/ClassicalLibertarians/comments/jpw3pd/a_list_of_all_the_anarchist_ideologies_their/
https://archive.ph/DSQfc

A list of ALL the anarchist ideologies, their major proponents, and one of their books. Which ones do you take from? Which do you despise?
- Tagged: Educational/Information

Anarchism Without Adjectives - not to be confused with synthesis anarchism, anarchism without adjectives is a unique movement that calls 
for the unity of all anarchists under a single movement. They claim that after the abolition of the state, people will be allowed to 
organize and form whatever anarchist society best suits themselves. They state that people may organize in ways that may be anti-thetical 
to their own view of liberty, but as long as the element of compulsion is not introduced upon unwilling participants, that people should 
be free to live and organize in whatever anarchist way that they see fit. - Voltairine De Cleyre (to some extent) and myself

Agorism - shortened to A3 (Anarchy, Agora, Action), is an economically right-wing ideology that believes that the Anarchist movement 
should embrace black and grey market activity, excluding red market activity, as a way of resistance against the state, a practice Agorism 
calls "Counter-Economics".

    Samuel Edward Konkin ||| The New Libertarian Manifesto

Anarcha-Feminism - She states that the patriarchy is a direct result of a hierarchy, and that dissolving authoritarianism comes with the 
abolition of the patriarchy. Often seen with Anarcho-Communism, she is dedicated to absolute equality of the genders, races, and social 
status.

    Emma Goldman, Voltairine de Cleyre, etc. Quiet Rumors

Anarcho-Agrarianism - believes in the preservation of the environment, and of more traditional agricultural practices to ensure food 
security. It also posits that the state is a threat to not just the way food is produced, but to the human way of life in general. It 
raises heritage breeds of animals, and grows heirloom plants. It isn't entirely opposed to genetic modification but is wary of GMOs 
produced by corporations, especially terminator crops.

    Antonio Roman-Aclalá Agrarian Anarchism and Authoritarian Populism

Anarcho-Capitalism - political ideology as well as a theoretical social order based around a classical liberal conception of property 
rights with the rejection of the state law in favour of market-based polycentric law and order.

    Murray Rothbard For A New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto

Anarcho-Collectivism - believes in a worker-owned economy seized directly by the workers with no interim state. He believes in a form of 
currency called labour coins, but unlike Mutualism, he does not believe in the market. He has a strenuous relationship with Marxism, who 
he believes to be authoritarian, but with some very good ideas.

    Mikhail Bakunin Stateless Socialism: Anarchism

Anarcho-Communism - believes in the abolition of the state and all structures of capital, leading to a stateless, classless, and post-
monetary society based on a Gift Economy and direct democracy.

    Peter Kroptkin The Conquest of Bread

Anarcho-Conservatism - advocates for a stateless society that upholds traditional values.

    Albert J Nock On Doing The Right Thing

Anarcho-Distributism - economically syncretic, culturally ambiguous, civically anarchist ideology that promotes pacificism, distributism 
(economic theory asserting that the world's productive assets should be widely owned rather than concentrated), and anarchy.

    Dorothy Day Loaves and Fishes

Anarcho-Fascism - (Nilssonian): wants to combine individual freedom and voluntarism with cultural homogeneity and generally reactionary 
social values. It is not necessarily opposed to the State itself, but rather it's monopoly on violence. It believes it is natural and 
necessary for men (and only men) to develop a capacity for violence in order to protect their individual freedom and property rights. 
(Donovanian): accelerationist, wanting to create a new beginning out of the corpse of the old like a parasitic fungus on the felled 
timber. When the state is destroyed, it believes society will turn men into idealized warriors and will revive medieval valor and morals.

    Look it up yourself, this was already too much.

Anarcho-Frontierism - an economically center ideology that believes that "true anarchist societies can only exist on the frontiers of... 
civilization" and so advocates for transhumanism to expand the frontier into space.

    Ephemeralization for Post-Capitalist Space Exploration

Anarcho-Independentism - a movement and ideology that advocates for autonomy from the state and defense of their culture, language and 
history. (These movements are prevalent in Western Europe. Catalonia, Basque Country, Occitania, and Brittany, which advocate for 
autonomy.)

Anarcho-Individualism - an economically variable and usually culturally progressive anarchist ideology that emphasizes the individual and 
the will of the individual over external determinants like society, groups, tradition and ideologies, seeing the abolition of the state as 
the fullest realization of individual liberty.

    Lysander Spooner No Treason

Anarcho-Monarchism - (natural): argues that government should fundamentally be the responsibility of as few people as such making an 
anarchy the ideal form of governance with the system most prefarable to the rule of none being the rule of one of monarchy. (ceremonial): 
Effectively a system in which you have a ceremonial monarchy except, instead of the ceremonial monarchy residing over a democracy, it 
resides over an anarchy. (No "state"): seperates the concepts of government and of the state with the former being a body which sets and 
enforces rules while the latter being a body which has a territorial monopoly on violence.

    Look it up yourself, this was already too much.

Anarcho-Naturism - an extremely progressive political ideology that advocates for social nudity and the abolition of the state. It also 
believes in Veganism, Environmentalism, Free Love, Individualism, Feminism and Socialism.

    Issac Puente El Comunismo Libertario y otras proclamas insurreccionales y naturistas

Anarcho-Nihilism - an Individualist Anarchist ideology who believes that life is without objective purpose, and as such, society, the 
state, and morals have no grounding in reality. They see government, family, and law as false constructs that have no real reason to 
govern the life of the individual, and thinks that the individual should reject false restraints.

    Aragorn! Nihilism, Anarchy, and the 21st century

Anarcho-Pacifism - usually economically left, culturally ambivalent, and anarchist ideology that advocates for the use of non-violent 
action to facilitate the abolition of the state and Capitalism. AnPacs believe that the use of violent force stands contrary to the anti-
hierarchical principle of Anarchism, as a group using force to topple a hierarchy has not eliminated it, but established itself at the 
head of it.

    Geoffrey Ostergaard Resisting the Nation State: The Pacifist and Anarchist Traditions.

Anarcho-Primitivism - a type of anarchism that goes against excessive use advanced technology, especially industrial technology; and in 
turn advocates the return to either agrarian or pre-agrarian lifestyles.

    Ted Kaczyński Industrial Society and Its Future

Anarcho-Syndicalism - believes that an anarchist society should be based around decentralized worker-controlled associations under the 
name of "Syndicates" (which is the French word for "Trade Union", although Syndicates in this context are more sophisticated than mere 
trade unions).

    Rudolf Rocker Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice

Anarcho-Transhumanism - believes that advancement of technology to a transhumanist point and reduction of state authority are 
complimentary notions and therefore to achieve singularity the state must be abolished.

    William Gillis What Is Anarcho-Transhumanism

Anationalism - a globalist, anarchist anti-nationalist ideology, originating within the sphere of Esperanto speakers. It believes in 
universalism, one-world-ism, and an auxiliary language shared by everyone.

    Eŭgeno Lanti Manifesto Of Non-Nationalists

Avaritionism - ideology that believes that an individual should be able to do anything they desire (i.e, live according to their 
avaritions), resulting in the stronger individuals rising to the top, and killing off those that are weaker. The abolition of the state in 
tandem with individuals acting however they want will allow those that they considers "strong" will act in their best interest to take the 
property of others, and will allow maximum competition of both markets and people. -Meme ideology

Black Anarchism - believe that the state has never treated Black Americans as full citizens and so African Americans are by default in a 
state of anarchy and in opposition with the state.

    Marquis Bey Anarcho-Blackness

Bookchin Communalism - believes in a stateless, classless, moneyless society, where hierarchy is reduced as much as possible. Independent 
communes participate in federalism, and most property is communal, but there is a high emphasis on environmentalism.

    Murray Bookchin Post Scarcity Anarchism

Buddhist Anarchism - rooted in three fundamental truths of the universe, the dharma seals,

    Everything is in a constant state of change, nothing is permanent.

    That "suffering" exists everywhere in Samsara.

    That everything is devoid of a "self."

Thus, there can be no "perfect State" in Samsara. Any man-made institution is impermanent as well as imperfect, as people and the world 
change constantly. Further, no material wealth or political power will grant people permanent happiness—unenlightened satisfaction is an 
illusion that only perpetuates samsara.

    Gary Snyder Buddhist Anarchism

Catholic Workerism - wants to have an Anarchist society with a collection of autonomous communities of Catholics. Their aim is to live in 
accordance with the justice and charity of Jesus Christ.

    Peter Maurin Catholic Radicalism: Phrased Essays For The Green Revolution

Christian Anarchism - claims Anarchism is inherent in Christianity and the Gospels. They are grounded in the belief that there is only one 
source of authority to which Christians are ultimately answerable: the authority of God as embodied in the teachings of Jesus. They 
therefore reject the idea that human governments have ultimate authority over human societies. ChristAn denounces the state, believing it 
is violent, deceitful and, when glorified, idolatrous.

    Leo Tolstoy The Kingdom Of God Is Within You

Crypto-Anarchism - Crypto-Anarchism wants to create an anarchist system through computer technology. They employ cryptographic software 
for confidentiality and security while sending and receiving information over computer networks, in an effort to protect privacy, 
political freedom, and economic freedom. By using cryptographic software, the association between the identity of a certain user or 
organization and the pseudonym they use is made difficult to find, unless the user reveals the association. Their motives are to defend 
against surveillance of computer networks communication and censorship. They also want to build and participate in counter economics.

    Timothy T. May The Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto

Eco-Anarchism - an anarchist school of thought that puts a particular emphasis on environmental issues. A green anarchist theory is 
normally one that extends anarchism beyond a critique of human interactions and includes a critique of the interactions between humans and 
non-humans as well.

    Corin Bruce Green Anarchism: Towards the Abolition of Hierarchy

Ego-Capitalism - a mix of certain part of Egoism's theory without regarding stuff related to private property being a "spook" and 
capitalism: it believes that spooks/social constructs, including the state, holds back Capitalism, the people and their egos, since it 
thinks that Capitalism is the best way an individual can please their ego.

    TheTimJesus (video) Unspook The Right

Ego-Communism - mainly stems from Emma Goldman's work and her blend of Max Stirner's ideas with those of Peter Kropotkin. They are not a 
Communist because of some abstract ideal of the 'good of the community' or 'for the people'. Instead, They are a Communist because they 
seek their own fulfillment above all else - the liberation of themself. They wants to get rid of wage labor, for that will free their ego 
from the cage of the system.

    Erin Collective (video) Egoist Communism Explained

Egoism - an off-the-compass libertarian and anarchist unity ideology that emphasizes the individual over another kind of guiding 
principle; that is, the individual should do as they please, not bound by any government or moral code. He often calls, well, everything 
he doesn't like a spook.

    Max Stirner The Ego and His Own

Existential Anarchism - believes that only when the world is upon each individual realizing their worthlessness can we achieve anarchy 
that benefits everyone.

    Freidrich Nietzsche Untimely Meditations

Geoanarchism - believes all individuals have an equal right to land. Occupying land incurs an indemnity to others which should be resolved 
in a decentralized fashion though a system of polycentric law.

    Fred Foldvary Geoanarchism: A Short Summary of Geoism and Its Relation to Libertarianism

Geomutualism - Geo-Mutualists strictly adhere to the cost principle, which states that cost should be the limit of price. Recognizing the 
natural competition for economic rent, we believe that occupancy and use is best defined by community acknowledgment, through the 
collection of a Land-Value Dues (LVD). Geo-Mutualists support mutual credit, community land trusts, and cooperative models of ownership, 
and seek to delegitimize usury, the private ownership of the Earth, and authoritarian social relations. Geo-Mutualists wish to see an end 
to state and private collection of taxes, rent, interest, and profit.

    Henry George Progress and Poverty

Hoppeanism - believes that to achieve a true and stable Anarcho-Capitalist society, there should be an active cultural hatred towards any 
sort of Leftism (especially, but not limited to, economic) and that State Democracy inherently results in a Leftist society. Additionally, 
Hoppe believes that property owners have the right to organize themselves into "Covenant Communities" to keep order and exclude people 
they don't like, namely homosexuals, from the general area and "peacefully relocate" them.

    Look it up yourself, this was already too much

Illegalism - claims that criminality is just another lifestyle. Stemming from the Individualist branch, it often uses the philosophy of 
Egoism to justify its means, which most commonly includes theft and shoplifting, however this may be expanded to include any crime which 
may improve it's wellbeing.

    Richard Perry The Bonnot Gang

Indigenous Anarchism - believes in toppling colonialist governments in order to allow Indigenous people's to organize how they please

Insurrectionary Anarchism - advocates an anti-Capitalist insurrection using small informal affinity group based organizations.

    Alfredo M. Bonanno Armed Joy

Islamic Anarchism - belief that no one other that Allah is suitable as imam thus the position should be dispensed with. Rulers inevitably 
became tyrants, thus the only acceptable course of action is to depose them.

    Anthony T. Fiscella Islamic Anarchism: A Brief Introduction

Jewish Anarchism - belief that mortal kings and rulers are bound to become tyrants, and that the true "kingdom under god" described in the 
Torah is anarchy.

    (Article) Jewish Anarchism

Left Rothbardianism - While working within the general framework of Ancap while heavily adopting Left-wing rhetoric and justifying certain 
left-wing policies (like workers seizing the means of production under certain circumstances) through Ancap thinking.

    Kevin Carson The Left Rothbardians, Part 1: Rothbard and The Left Rothbardians, Part 2: After Rothbard

Machajskism - argues that the class interests of intellectuals, including Marxist social democrats, are opposed to that of manual workers, 
since the unproductive labour of intellectuals depended upon preserving a hereditary monopoly on education at workers' expense. Rather 
than put their hopes in political revolution, revolution would consist of a violent revolt of the unemployed worker-peasant.

    Marshall S. Shatz Jan Wacław Machajski: A Radical Critic of the Russian Intelligensia and Socialism

Market Anarchism - believes that the combo of a strict application of natural rights and of Lockean self-ownership and a totally 
unregulated Austrian economics in a stateless society will "eat the rich", resulting in much more equality and welfare than a state 
regulated capitalism could offer. They do not like the term "capitalism" as they uses it to refer to a corrupt market where corporate 
welfare and state subsidies favor big corporation at the expense of fair competition, thus generating inequality. They rather prefer the 
term "radically freed market".

    Gary Chartier etc. Markets, Not Capitalism

Mutualism - advocates for a socialist system based on a free market economy and usufructs, the introduction of a mutual credit bank, 
ownership of the means of production by either the workers collectively or by the individual(s) using them, and the representation of 
trade by equal amounts of labour in the free market. Additionally, they are strongly in favour of individual liberty and can be seen as 
the unifying ideology between the social and individualist and the social and market schools of anarchist thought.

    Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

[Nationalist Anarchism] - believes in autonomous communes that should be run by a Mutualist economic system in addition to traditional and 
Reactionary social views and should be segregated ethnically, with the addition of a Meritocratic social system. They hate Marxism, due to 
their internationalist ideals (but likes it if it's anarchist, nationalist ,and traditionalist) but hates Capitalism even more. Ecological 
protection is also important to NatAn, but mostly because they believes in the preservation of traditional land.

    Look it up yourself, this was already too much

Panarchism - believes people should have the right to chose the form of government (or no government) without having to migrate, it's the 
idea that every part of certain country or group of lands should be led by voluntary associations of people and free competition of form 
of governments. Panarchy generally believes in free-market economics, but not always.

    Paul Émile de Puydt Panarchy

Philosophical Anarchism - an Anarchist school of thought which holds that the state lacks moral legitimacy whilst not supporting violence 
to eliminate it.

    John P. Clark The Philosophical Anarchism of William Goodwin

Platformism - seeks unity from its participants, having as a defining characteristic the idea that each platformist organization should 
include only people that are fully in agreement with core group ideas, rejecting people who disagree. It stresses the need for tightly 
organized anarchist organizations that are able to influence working class and peasant movements.

    Nestor Ivanovych (Bat'ko) Makhno

Post-Anarchism - an anarchism understood not as [a] certain set of social arrangements, or even as a particular revolutionary project, but 
rather as a sensibility, a certain ethos or way of living and seeing the world which is impelled by the realization of the freedom that 
one already has.

    Saul Newman The Politics of Postanarchism

Post-Colonial Anarchism - libleft ideology on the left on tradition axis even rejecting "nationalism" in that they do not seek to make the 
nation a political unit thus being self-consciously anti-racist. They encourage separation from oppressive state/colonial structures.

    Roger White Post Colonial Anarchism

Post-Left Anarchism - critiques the left from a more radical viewpoint, advocating for a range of ideas such as Insurrectionism, 
Individualism, Egoism, Accelerationism, anti-civ, post-civ, Nihilism, anti-work, Xenofeminism, cyber-nihilism, post-situationism, 
postmodernism, post-structuralism, and others. They usually advocate for insurrection in order to smash the modern consumerist society and 
favors illegalism, distinguishing themself from otherwise similar libertarian left ideology by their rejection of several ideas associated 
with the cultural and economic left.

    Nadia C. Your Politics Are Boring As Fuck

Primalism - Primalism is so against the human experiment that any sign of evolutionary development past base survive-or-die animal 
instinct is considered evil and must be punished. This is naturally opposed the the idea of society, so Primalism is anarchist as well.

    Meme ideology

Queer Anarchism - believes in social insurrection, the abolition of the state and capitalism and the anarchist ideal of complete 
individual freedom as a method of liberation for the LGBTQ+ community and the abolition of homophobia, transphobia, heteronormativity, 
patriarchy and the gender binary.

    Various authors Queering Anarchism

Situationism - economically left and very libertarian ideology and philosophical movement that believes in an anti-authoritarian 
interpretation of Marxism, in fusion with the avant-garde art movement. He believes that the Media, or as he would call it "the 
spectacle", is the manifestation of commodity fetishism rampant in today's society.

    (Wiki page) Situationist International

Social Anarchism - believes in a stateless, classless society based on the principles of free-association, mutual aid and social equality. 
To SocAns, the commune is the cornerstone of social organization, where all participants can vote in a direct democracy. They strongly 
advocate for a decentralized co-operative economic system centered around worker's self-management, in which trade unions and worker's 
cooperatives have democratic control over the economy. Much like AnCom, SocAn believes in the abolition of unjust hierarchies from state 
control to private capital, arguing that as long as structures of political and economic oppression continue to exist, individual freedom 
will never be realized in full.

    Murray Bookchin Social Anarchism or Lifestyle Anarchism: An Unbridgeable Chasm

Soulism - believes that an individual should be able to do anything they desire, resulting in everyone sharing all their property (both 
private and personal) with everybody else because it is in everybody's best interest to share. Furthermore, Soulism believes that not only 
should the hierarchies of state, capital, and reaction be abolished but also hierarchies such as gravity or inertia. Soulism believes this 
to be possible by ascending to a higher level of being.

    Meme ideology

Synthesis Anarchism - believes in joining all anti-capitalist anarchist ideologies under one movement. This means that every anarchist 
ideology from economically left of center and culturally left or right should be united under a federation where the communities are 
mostly separate but are still connected.

    Voline and Sébastien Faure

Taoist Anarchism - believes Taoism is an Anarchist religion and philosophy and that Taoism should be the main religion to model the 
Anarchist society after.

    Josh Anarchism and Taoism

Total Liberationism - movement that combines anarchism with a commitment to animal and earth liberation. They also take normal anarchist 
talking points like the state and capitalism, and use them as a way to show the struggle for total liberation.

    (Wiki) Total Liberationism

Veganarchism - an anarchist and environmentalist movement that believes that the hierarchy of humans over animals is unjust, so we should 
not eat any animal products.

    Brian A. Dominick Animal Libertarian and Social Revolution

[Voluntaryism] - a variation of Anarcho-Capitalism inhabiting the bottom right of the compass, with no specific cultural implications. It 
primarily believes that violence is never, ever, justified to be initiated in a non-defensive way, and seeing taxation as robbery it 
believes it should be voluntary (Basically that services are given by private organizations and it's vountary to pay them, you pay them if 
you want to use that service).

    Auberon Herbert The principles of Voluntaryism and Free Life
    
/end
