#### CYCLIDEON REDDIT : ANARCHISM IN A NUTSHELL

**U/Cyclideon**

Anarchism means an opposition to power, and the maximization of freedom for all. It suggests we can live much richer lives as equals, 
without commanding or exploiting or abusing one another.

In place of government, we propose free association & agreement. In place of capitalism, we propose networks of contractors, cooperatives, 
collectives, commons, mutual-aid associations, and a hundred other things. In place of gender, racial, and ability-based hierarchies, we 
propose equality and the recognition that your freedom is my freedom. In place of arbitrary ingroup/outgroup-based identities (i.e. 
nations), we propose seeing yourself as an individual and a cosmopolitan.

#### ANON REDDIT : USEFUL ANARCHIST DEFINITIONS

> (Might be Cyclideon who wrote this?)

When you said you were once an anarchist I assumed you would have a grasp of the theory. From what you said you either know less than 
nothing - attributing views to anarchism that many anarchists do not hold - or you have skipped parts of your argumentation

You need a 101 education in anarchist theory if you want to engage anarchists in debate. Especially if you are going to use that arrogant, 
insulting tone. If you are going to act like an insufferable know-it-all on a subject, it's best to have at least a basic understanding of 
it.

Firstly, terminology. I am not sure if you are using different definitions than is common in anarchist circles, but many marxists do, and 
you use some terms in an imprecise manner from the perspective of anarchist analysis. So, I must be clear what I mean by certain terms.

**Absolutes** - ideas that control people, instead serving them. Concepts that make reference to absolute right and subordinate human interests 
to that concept.

**Authority** - this refers to social relationships in which one party obeys another with no reference to its own interests. This is distinct 
from violence or coercion, and this distinction is critical to understanding anarchist theory. “I followed their orders and shot this dude 
because I would have been killed if I did not”, “I followed their orders and shot this dude because I am duty bound to do so”, and “I 
agreed with them and so shoot this dude for our own good” are different situations and should not be conflated.

**The State** - the actual institution claiming effective absolute authority over a geographic area. Not “the entirety of social organisation” 
or “the highest level of social organisation” within an area and not the organised violence of a ruling class. The state is also these 
things, but the state is a specific manifestation of them.

**Law** - specifically top down legal systems, in which an authority imposes its view of social organisation on its subjects. Distinct from 
free agreement to shared standards or emergent standards.

Secondly, you assume that anarchists are advocating for the destruction of industry and society in a mad crusade to inflict what we see as 
right on the world.

However, the anarchist position is that advanced industrial society does not require authority to exist. That no material worth is gained 
by relations of obedience. That authority hampers the development of civilisation. It is a practical point as much as an ethical one.

With is mind, I'm now going to plough through some of you examples of what you think anarchism is.

> What about law which subordinates brute human actions for more freedom for the society?

Why is law guaranteed to subordinate brute human actions? If people, unconstrained, tend towards brutish actions then law is not the 
solution. Law, using my definition, releases the ultimate lawmakers from the control of their subjects, and so there is no constraint on 
the brutality of their law in so far as their authority is obeyed. Not only this, but now their brutality is magnified by the obedience of 
their subjects, who act as tools in its enactment.

Anarchism is not an acceptance of a Hobbesian war of all against all as you suggest. It is the idea that there is a better way out of it 
than submission to authority. People fear the brutality of others, and mutual agreement to forgo brutality, on a understanding that 
abandoning such an agreement leaves you open to the brutality of others, does not let anyone off the hook as submission to authority does. 
If people can not be trusted not to be brutal, they most certainly can not be trusted with authority.

Imagine a world where murder depended on the moral will and ego of the individual, and no authority could be applied against offenders 
because of such idealism.

If everyone is free to murder as they will, then the restraint to murder is the fact that people can murder you back. Prohibitions on 
murder are universal across human cultures because of this. No higher authority needs to impose this. Without authority it is very clear 
that if you kill people, then other people, who do not like the idea of being killed, are not going to make much of a fuss if you yourself 
meet a violent end.

However, authority allows for is cold blooded murder to be justified. A killer without authority is seen as a threat to personal safety 
and society at large by almost everyone. Someone in authority can not be questioned, and can not only kill with impunity but give their 
underlings that power too.

Imagine the same thing with war and pollution, with food standards and hoarding of resources.

But I thought we were imagining a world in which murder depended on the moral will and ego of the individual? Good luck polluting, 
poisoning and hoarding without authority to protect you. There is nothing to stop those you harm from stringing you up from a lamp post. 
And bystanders will judge your fate not by if the law protects you, but by the danger you posed to them.

This is how genuine revolutions play out. While authoritarian elements may take control later, they are not planned from above by a 
central cadre but are a spontaneous uprising from below. In the beginning there is no law, the workers and peasants take land and 
factories on their own. They fight their enemies and combine to ensure peace amongst themselves without the need to claim authority. 
Society does not break down.

As to war, if murder depended on the moral will and ego of the individual we would see far less of it. After all, aggressive war depends 
on the mobilisation of vast numbers of people who have no inherent reason to murder each other at the behest of rulers who suffer no 
personal risk for their bloodlust.

> Can you envision a  successful revolution which is unable to apply authority against defenders of class relations?

You conflate force with authority. Defenders of class relations are not going to recognise any revolutionary claim to authority. If they 
did, they would not be defenders of class relations. Anarchists have no problem with defence against such forces.

What authority can do is allow revolutionary organisations to drift from being a representation of their member’s interests into being 
another method of extraction of surplus labour. Defending the revolution from outside is useless if you have already scuppered it from 
within.

My points here against specific manifestations of authority are practical points as well as ethical ones. Yes, I have an ethical 
commitment to anarchism, but that is not an excuse to dismiss the practical organizational components of anarchist theory as idealism. You 
probably have some ethical stance that leads you to support Marxism, this does not automatically make Marxist theory itself idealistic. If 
you want a stateless, classless society, your ethics must have at least a little in common with anarchism, and your disagreement is over 
methods not ideals.

Which, lastly, brings me to my third point. You assume that anarchism can not integrate Marx into their analysis and that anarchists are 
idealists for being anti-authoritarian. I say you make this assumption because you go on to state a load of Marxist theory - that is 
besides the point - as if this disproved anarchist theory. You don't  understand that a lot of anarchist theory is not contesting the same 
ground as Marxism.

Marx exposes the contradictions, tendencies, and class conflicts at play within capitalism. Many Anarchists have a lot of time for his 
theories. Bakunin praised them, but Marx is not infallible, and in many cases he glossed over important subjects without deep examination.

For example, the workers must assert their interests against those of the capitalist class, but how is this done? What organisational 
structures can represent the worker’s interests as a whole? We know that some organisations are structurally incapable of representing 
their members. Take my original reply:

Any relationship of authority puts those in power in a position where, in so far as they wield authority, they do not have to answer for 
corruption or incompetence.

While you were going through the rote motions of decrying my idealism and declaring my beliefs a “relic of impracticality” and “utopian 
drivel”, you were missing the practical point - authority does not answer to those under it, so it has no incentive to represent their 
interests. How then can authoritarian organisations represent the working class?

You equally missed the core of my point that authority can not serve the interests of those under it even if it tries - that authority is 
inefficient. Capitalism lays the material groundwork for communism by increasing the productivity of labour in its unending hunger for 
surplus value. Only once a certain level of productivity is reached can we make the jump to communism.

However, organisation is a tool to increase productivity just as materiel is, and there is an increasing body of economic and 
anthropological evidence that centralised authoritarian organisations are economically inefficient compared to more horizontal 
organisations. Authority may need to be swept away not just because it can not represent the interests of the working class, but also 
because it's an obsolete form that is holding the productive forces back - supported more because it allows the appropriation of surplus 
value than because it is the best way of creating it.

The ins and outs of pragmatic organising, of the structure of institutions and their systematic tendencies, of efficiency and 
productivity, what socialism actually looks like and how it builds to communism - these are the actual disputes you should be looking to 
argue with anarchists. And you can't win any of them by shouting “idealist!” and them rambling on about the glories of materialism because 
these are debates about techniques as much as about ideals, and anarchism can be materialist.
