#### ANON REDDIT : RESPONSE TO ANTI-THERAPY ANARCHIST ANON

You make good points. I am sorry to have  made assumptions of your experience based on your comments. Power dynamics are an understood, 
heavily researched, and evolving area in therapy.  I would say that your experience falls under “bad experience” however because your needs 
were clearly not met.

Your critiques were similar in structure to ones I have read from neurotypical folk with certain shared experience (structuring my response 
along those lines). Given the new information, I’d say that this is a valid point of criticism for the profession... There is only a recent 
emergence of the validity of non-neurotypical ways of being. (Indeed, the history of formalized psychology is full of poor 
interpretations.)  So yeah you got me there... It doesn’t work for everybody and in some cases can lead to an internalization of deficit 
thinking. This can be worsened by the inherent power differentials of client vs therapist (which all therapists are educated on and which 
good therapists keep forefront in their thoughts).

That being said, your call to abolish therapy is, in my opinion, ill advised. I went to school for this stuff, I am also subject to a 
genetic variation that causes shifts in patterns of thought, I have close relatives who are autists, I went into the whole shebang aware of 
power differentials.

But I am willing to bet, that if I gave you, and your friendship group who have helped you so much, a sampling of people and their problems 
and asked you how to help solve them - you’d fail as I did before specific education and practice. If you read a treatment manual,  and 
online tutorials for administrating therapeutic techniques, you’d still likely fail. It takes experience and specialist knowledge.  And 
when I say “problem” I mean something the person themselves identifies as a problem... Not something societally imposed.

Smoking cessation (and other habits), neurotransmitter imbalances resulting in disturbing hallucinations, delusions and disordered 
thoughts, cyclic self doubt, crippling anxiety and depression. If it were easy to fix by yourself, or with family and friends... People 
would do that.

Like I said my wife is a trained therapist, I’m working on it, we suffered from OCD and major depression. We both tried to self therapy, we 
tried to help each other, it was not a case of societal expectations (though those worsened our experience) it is a matter of our brain 
chemistry.  In several cases even what was recommended by other therapists was wrong, though intuitive... My natural inclination, and that 
of my wife’s first therapist for her OCD was to reassure her and try to logic away her anxiety... It wasn’t until she went to a specialist 
who practiced exposure response prevention that she saw any kind of symptom reduction.  She has fewer symptoms now than she did as a 3 year 
old! And just to clarify OCD  (as she has it) works by way of the brain firing off dopamine at the wrong times, causing the person to 
attach undo significance to aspects of experience, and over time it leads to delusions and fixations that can ruin the relationships with 
these friends and loved ones you speak about. It can be highly alienating. She and I both, because of the stake we had in the relationship 
were pretty shitty help for each other (though we remained loving and supportive). We will never live as “normal people”, we will always 
have to live a “recovery lifestyle”, but that is so that we can be happy and whole... Not so we can be better workers.

Yes, we need increased awareness of neurodiversity. Yes, we need to eliminate money from human interactions.  Yes, we need to make sure 
that people who work as helpers are not in it for the wrong reason, and yes, we need to hold helpers to high standards of practice to 
prevent assholes from slipping in. Yes, we need to shift away from a drugs first medical interventionist societal function view of mental 
health toward wellness.

But we do not need to abolish therapy.  I’m an anarchist, yes I have to eat and so I work for cash (but always in human services so that my 
work is meaningful). I do not support the cops, I do not support the military, I do not support the state or any hierarchy.  I will not 
find other work because people (maybe not you) have found my work to be helpful and liberating.  I posted initially not to attack OP, or 
you in my responses to you, not out of a place of needing to justify my views or prop up a system of power/exploitation, but because I did 
not want readers of this sub to suffer needlessly by adhering to the (privileged) position  that they can just deal with aversive mental 
states on their own (implied: if they can’t then they are just too broken or failures).  Can you make your own toaster from scratch? Maybe 
if you are an electrician and have access to specialist crafting materials... If not, then you need help. If you cannot deal with painful 
intrusive thoughts or states of mind your family and friends may help you, they may hurt you (even if they mean well), but a therapist has 
specific knowledge and experience that increase the likelihood of you getting what you need.

Therapy has been turned into something exploitative by some, but at its root it is anarchist or at least anarchist friendly. (Two humans 
come together voluntarily for a purpose, one shares their knowledge and skills to help the other achieve their goals. Anything outside of 
this is a bug not a feature.)
