#### hbomberguy : 2019-06-?? : on liberals vs anarchists

> (curiouscat question not copied)

This is a really interesting question, so I’ll try and lay out a couple things I think you’re referring to. People who identify as small L 
liberals will typically value democracy, equality, and freedom. They also typically value an expansive welfare state, a large military for 
self defense, and a mixed bag of other policies (ie pro-Israel, pro-taxes, anti-gun, anti-discrimination, pro-capitalism, etc.).

So let’s look at the first few values first and how anarchists typically do them better than liberals. Democracy to liberals generally 
means voting in elections, but stops when it comes to the workplace, community organizations, and direct democracy. Liberals are the people 
I hear the loudest say they don’t want “mob rule” or “tyranny of the majority.” They don’t want democracy applied to anything except an 
incredibly narrow set of political objectives. They only use democracy to legitimize the existence of the state. Philosophers like Locke 
and Rousseau said the state is only a legitimate enforcer of the social contract if it has the consent of the governed. Ergo, liberals in 
this tradition believe that voting in elections is equivalent to the will of the governed. Anarchists take this point to its logical 
extreme. For example, in the workplace, only the consent and will of the workers is legitimate, therefore all workplaces should be run 
democratically. They are not, and liberals tend to ignore this. Or how about community defense. Liberals defend police, an anti-democratic 
and oppressive force in our society. Anarchists would apply democracy to policing by creating locally-run and locally-accountable community 
defense forces that answer to the people because they ARE the people. So there’s a couple examples of how democracy is done better by 
anarchists.

Next is equality. To liberals, equality means everyone should have the same opportunity, regardless of skin color, race, gender, sexual 
orientation, etc. But liberals stop there. Their conception of equality is fundamentally undermined by their inability to attack oppression 
at its source: hierarchy. They believe as long as things are “fair,” then hierarchies can remain in place (ESPECIALLY class-based hierarchy 
like property ownership, bosses with power over employees, politicians with authority over constituents, etc.). Because they defend the 
state and defend capitalism—and because they do no actual work to destroy hierarchy and oppression—their rhetoric is hollow. Anarchists, on 
the other hand, extend equality to its natural extreme. We believe in the dissolution of all hierarchies, including the state and 
capitalism, as well as white supremacy, misogyny, transphobia, homophobia, sexism, classism, ageism, ableism, etc. And we try to attack the 
heart of the problem: hierarchy itself, rather than searching for state solutions to social problems. So once again, we see that anarchists 
are the ones who perform better at liberals’ own stated value.

Last is freedom. Liberals might want to legalize pot or same-sex marriage, but they don’t want to abolish capitalism, which enslaves us to 
wage slavery and the bosses. We are forced to sell our lives to capitalists in order to feed ourselves and our families. We have no choice 
in the matter: we work or we starve. That’s not freedom at all. Add on top of that how liberals defend prisons to “rehabilitate” people 
into good citizens, when all prisons are good for is generating profits, incarcerating populations deemed problematic (ie uneducated black 
men, “drug dealers,” other so-called undesirables). We are not free until we abolish the laws which govern our behavior and punish us for 
nonconformity; we are not free as long as we are free to starve if we demand better working conditions; we are not free as long as 
politicians sell out their constituents for fat paychecks and private-sector kickbacks. Anarchists want freedom from the state and 
capitalism, and we want the freedom to pursue our own self-fulfillment. Liberals can’t win in that regard either. They keep asking us to 
forfeit our freedoms for security or stability.

With regard to the second group of liberal values, we are not like liberals at all. We don’t want imperialist wars of “self defense,” we 
don’t want oppression, we don’t want capitalism. We don’t want the welfare state or any state at all.

So do I believe liberals are hypocrites when it comes to their own values? Yes. That’s how I try to convert people. Slowly chipping away at 
them until they realize their own hypocrisy. I ask if they believe in democracy, why aren’t they fighting to unionize their workplace? If 
they love freedom, why aren’t they pushing to end wars and dismantle the military? If they hate racism, why do they still tell bad jokes 
when people of color aren’t around? Things like that.
