[LIVE LINK](https://www.reddit.com/r/Anarchism/wiki/acab) --/////-- 
[ARCHIVE LINK](https://archive.ph/p0rEr)

#### Yes, ACAB, and Here's Why

> What does it mean when socialists say that all cops are bastards?

If it were problems with individual officers, you'd be able to give them the benefit of the doubt, but it isn't; The problems are 
institutional. The job itself is a bastard, therefore by carrying out the job, they are bastards. To take it to an extreme: there were no 
good members of the gestapo, because there was no way to carry out the directives of the gestapo and still be a good person. It's the same 
with the police state. the job of the police is not to protect and serve, but to dominate, control, and terrorize in order to maintain the 
interests of state and capital. Individually or as a group, police officers function as members of a class of people whose purpose is to 
enforce the will of the capitalist oligarchy and maintain a constant state of class warfare against the people to keep their rich masters 
in power.

> Who are the good cops then? The ones who either quit or are fired for refusing to do the job.

--- cops across the nation constantly engage in violent, hateful rhetoric on facebook, illustrating the curation of a culture of violence. 
luckily for us, it was tracked and collated

--- police shoot people twice as often as previously thought. Keep in mind that this was self-reported, so we have no way of knowing if 
these numbers speak to the actual number of shootings in the US. Many of these people are completely unarmed. Police kill far, far more 
people than terrorists in the US.

--- Being a taxi driver is literally more dangerous than being a cop.

--- cops are more of a danger to themselves than anyone else is to them

--- they've admitted to stealing as much -or recently more- than burglars through "asset forfeiture," and the rate of their thefts has 
been climbing yearly. Keep in mind, these numbers only articulate what's been reported. It's probable that they've stolen far more than 
just this.

--- police are literally allowed to rape people on the job in 35 states, as they have the power to determine whether or not you consented 
to sex with them while in their custody.

--- up to 50% of the people police murder are disabled

--- the police are being trained to kill as if they're an occupying army and we're an insurgency. this is an inevitability, as the 
military-industrial complex needs to keep expanding into new markets.

--- Eugenics was still alive and well in the prison-industrial complex up until very recently, and could very well be continuing for all 
we know, as it was forcibly sterilizing inmates as late as 2010. I honestly don't see a reason to believe it's stopped.

--- the police, as an institution, are so completely steeped in violence, that up to 40% of them commit acts of domestic violence and 
abuse

--- you can't even really defend yourself from a cop, and if a cop murders you for no reason, he's almost certainly going to get away with 
it

--- Once you're in jail, be prepared to sit there for weeks -or months or years. It's so bad that people constantly plead guilty just so 
they can get out. It's so bad and so common, in fact, that over a third of all exonerations come after an individual has pleaded guilty. 
So much for the right to a speedy trial, huh?

--- And getting arrested is easy. Tens of thousands of people yearly thanks to lowest bidder garbage that police departments use in order 
to test for illicit substances. Field drug tests are about as reliable as lie detector tests or horoscopes. They just don't fucking work. 
They just don't.

--- Think you're safe if you just follow directions? Yeah, no. And if they don't just outright kill you, they could make their 
instructions so arcane and hard to follow that they'll kill you for not following them, and they'll usually get away with it. He got away 
with it, by the way. Surprise!

--- They'll prosecute you for even knowing about crimes cops have committed.

--- Police exist to control and terrorize us, not serve and protect us. That's only their function if you happen to be rich and powerful.

--- And we all know that cops love shooting our pets, but how many do they really slaughter? This database has begun tracking animal 
killings by police. It's not perfect, as it's going to miss a ton of them, but it's a start.

--- the police as they are now haven't even existed for 200 years as an institution, and the modern police force was founded to control 
crowds and catch slaves, not to "serve and protect" -- unless you mean serving and protecting what people call "the 1%." They have a long 
history of controlling the working class by intimidating, harassing, assaulting, and even murdering strikers during labor disputes. This 
isn't a bug; it's a feature.

The police do not serve justice. The police serve the ruling classes, whether or not they themselves are aware of it. They make our 
communities far more dangerous places to live, but there are alternatives to the modern police state. There is a better way.

Further Reading:

(all links are to free versions of the texts found online - many curated from this source)

--- white nationalists court and infiltrate a significant number of Sheriff's departments nationwide

--- an analysis of post-ferguson policing

--- why police shouldn't be tolerated at Pride

--- Kropotkin and a quick history of policing

--- Agee, Christopher L. (2014). The Streets of San Francisco: Policing and the Creation of a Cosmopolitan Liberal Politics, 1950-1972. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- Camp, Jordan and Heatherton, Christina, eds. (2016). Policing The Planet: Why the policing crisis led to Black Lives Matter. New York: 
Verso.

--- Center for Research on Criminal Justice. (1975). The Iron fist and the velvet glove: An analysis of the U.S. police. San Francisco: 
Center for Research on Criminal Justice.

--- Creative Interventions. (2012). Creative Interventions Toolkit: A Practical Guide to Stop Interpersonal Violence.

--- Jay, Scott. (2014). “Who gives the orders? Oakland police, City Hall and Occupy.” Libcom.org.

--- Malcolm X Grassroots Movement. (2013). Let Your Motto Be Resistance: A Handbook on Organizing New Afrikan and Oppressed Communities 
for Self-Defense.

--- Mogul, Joey L., Andrea J. Ritchie and Kay Whitlock. (2015). “The Ghosts of Stonewall: Policing Gender, Policing Sex.” From Queer 
(In)Justice: The Criminalization of LGBT People in the United States. Boston: Beacon Press, 2012.

--- Rose City Copwatch. (2008). Alternatives to Police.

--- Wacquant, Loic. (2009). Punishing the poor: The neoliberal government of social insecurity. Durham: Duke University Press.

--- Williams, Kristian. (2004). Our Enemies in Blue: Police and power in America. New York: Soft Skull Press.

--- Williams, Kristian. (2011). “The other side of the COIN: counterinsurgency and community policing.” Interface 3(1).

/////// content written and compiled by /u/american_apartheid
/////// Last revised by AnarchaMorrigan - 1 year ago
