## START

_gabrielamadej : 2019-12-25 : on nazis & power_

[Live Link](https://curiouscat.me/gabrielamadej/post/1024494502)

> Legalize holocaust denial

i mean, yeah, i don't care if people twist history to fit their hate-fuelled narratives and cognitive errors (particularly: excessive 
pattern-matching--since 'the jews' quickly ascend to culturally high positions because of their intelligence and propensity to quickly 
overcome oppression/persecution, therefore.... a series of Nazi shit that doesn't follow and, even if it did follow, would not resolve 
problematical dynamics inherent in power and influence that are the root of the problems they only indirectly identify via a class of 
constructed scapegoats. remove 'the jews' and what remains? a vacuum to be filled by not-jews--even when positing their own assumptions of 
how the world works! people prone to populist-esque politics are all-too-easily captured by the notion that what is wrong with institutional 
power structures is not the dynamics of those structures themselves (knowledge/perspective distortions, macroscopic views of society that 
disable their empathy and attentiveness to individual and local interests, etc etc.) but simply the virtue and character of those in power. 
which is a strikingly naive view. even the best people holding political power will--through the act and process of wielding power--make 
morally abhorrent blunders *they do not even intend* due to persistent-through-history aspects of power that make one blind and stupid. only 
radical liberals/anarchists are really willing to see this--or, when others see this, really only anarchists/radical liberals are willing to 
take this observation to its inevitable conclusion: the abolition of power.

furthermore i'm a free speech absolutist who is frequently sent into hysterical laughter when non-anarchist and even some anarchist radical 
leftists misunderstand the danger of certain legal precedents being set--and evidently misunderstand state power in general--when they civil 
rights defense lawyers who represent nazis in court as themselves nazi sympathizers. how they do not understand that the expansion of power 
can in this domain start by restricting the rights of universally unsympathetic and reviled types and then spill over--after initial 
precedents are in place--into an increasing series of rights violations of not only other radicals but complete normies as well... is beyond 
me. the primal scream against liberal and anarchist diagnosis' of power is really just a childish temper tantrum, even if suppressed in 
sophisticated personas--Richard Spencer was too narcissistic to keep it suppressed--that they *want things this way, now* and will use *any 
means* to get it and others should just *accept that* because *that's how the world works*. if your vision of a better world is intend to do 
x, vaguely establish the means--by appealing to powerful institutions and their ability to move people like chess pieces on a board--to do 
it, and dogmatically assume that your intentions and plans will work out well--you're not a morally-intellectually serious person

## END
