Live Link https://x.com/atheopagan/status/1790812918893711592

Archive Link https://archive.is/OxRcc

prison abolition is an exotic conclusion that results from considerations friendly but not identical to it so explicit 'prison abolition literature' is going to be rare and, 
as of right now, of the low quality manifesto variety. i don't think people should be excessively literature-bound in that way: it's not as if, for any atomized proposition, 
there is going to be a breadth of high quality literature trailing behind that proposition. the 'shifty' part seems at least temporarily necessary if it's going to be a 
radical and unpopular proposal in the face of uncertainty. if a person says something like: 'well, we need to take a public health approach to crime; we should focus on 
preventative measures; prisons tend to concentrate violence into themselves rather than reduce net interpersonal violence (e.g. the recurring victims and perpetrators of 
violence tend to overlap even outside of prison); here are reasons why preventative and non-punitive measures are feasible...' yada yada, then it is still an epistemic gamble 
about whether it would work out. but that's the case for almost any meaningful change in society. 

when it comes to the conservative case, i often see takes like: 'a small population of people commit most of the crime, and so it makes sense to keep them locked away in an 
environment where they don't disturb the rest of society. there are several problems with this view. for one, it already harmonizes with the abolitionist viewpoint that 
prisons concentrate rather than reduce violence. it is not ethically obvious that perpetrators of crime deserve increased exposure to harm compared to the rest of the 
population. from commonsensical notions of moral desert, this would be the case, but i explicitly oppose those notions. 

secondly we still need to deal with the fact that here will be significant criminal elements in society that are non-rehabilitated menaces. the cycle of non-rehabilitated 
individuals dynamically entering and exiting prison doesn't seem to be achieving anything good: there is available space to say that the prison 
environment itself is traumatic enough to encourage recidivism (regardless of whether they're already predisposed toward it) and that, if the reasoning of prison enthusiasm 
were followed through, we should actually prefer life sentences and death penalties for almost everything. (which would be absurd. some reactionaries take this conclusion, 
however, and that is where their ethical thought is weak: it seems strange to say that a person ought to be subject to such extreme and traumatic coercion, simply because to 
do otherwise is inefficient when hyper-optimizing for the narrow concern of reducing or preventing interpersonal crime.) 

so the prison abolition ethic has an advantage here: it allows us to understand that, no matter what criminal justice system we have, we on some level - to quote my most 
popular tweet - must 'get over it,' and move on from the unfixable presence of crime. all other approaches are obsessed with minimizing or preventing interpersonal crime, even 
at the costs of outright torture to disfavoured actors. whereas the prison abolitionist ethic follows Nietzsche in imagining a society strong enough that it can resist those 
who attack it without even striking back. this has more benefits than just abolishing prisons: it may have downstream effects like discouraging vigilantism and cycles of 
violence. (so long as it is metastasized as an ethic, which is the prison abolitionist goal.) 

otherwise there is an awkward balance between the sociological and ethical concerns. if there is a compelling ethical call to abolish prisons - so long as a person takes 
libertarian-facing ethics seriously - then i would furthermore say that even some of the 'failure modes' of prison abolition are worth tolerating. - i.e. it is still worth 
removing the gratuitous and incomprehensible evil of prison environments even if significantly increased interpersonal violence resulted from prison abolition. if my 
evaluative judgments about the nature of prison are correct, then there is reasonable tolerance for even poor outcomes here. 

as far as i present prison abolition, the minimum requirements are that a) prison abolition doesn't unravel the fabric of society as we know it (which is distinguished from 
outcomes like higher rates of crime,) and that b) my evaluative judgments on prison are true enough to make the risks of abolishing prison worth tolerating. lastly i would say 
that abolitionism gains an extra advantage when it comes to considering institutional incentives. perhaps a person can partially agree with my thoroughly liberal ethic, but 
call for moderating prison sentences and improving prison environments. (for example alongside the Scandinavian model.) one problem is that prison environments are *as bad as 
they are* for reproducible reasons that can't be willed away ad- hoc. 

it's not as if we can, say, choose between better and worse prison environments and will one or the other to be true. particularly not if we localize the effect, such as by 
adding qualifiers like '...in the United States, which has a punitive culture and an overbuilt prison industry.' prison environments are regularly going to encourage abuses of 
people's dignity, and prison institutions will have a tendency to reproduce (and expand) themselves for the same reason all institutions have the same tendency. so abolishing 
prison is here a way to cut out the cancer before it can spread, instead of treating it more mildly and later being surprised when it metastasizes once more. in sum: there is 
a large clash of ethical takes, sociological views, and personal risk tolerance that goes into opposing or supporting prison abolition. so it's a difficult topic. but one that 
people don't take seriously not because it is shaky - everything radical seems, by nature, shaky and untested - but often for reasons that prison abolitionists are correct 
about. (such as a preoccupation with sadistic revenge, or unrealistic fears of interpersonal crime even in well-developed countries.)
