VAUSH : ON GENDER ABOLITION : VIDEO TRANSCRIPT EDITED FOR FLOW BY A FAN

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Gb_LruXLFA

*TL;DR - Read everything that's encased with asterisks / written in bold.*

Since time immemorial, in terms of broad, dimorphic social groupings, we have had “two sexes;” however, this does not make sex a literal 
binary. Sex can be described more accurately as a bimodal distribution. That means that, typically speaking, people fall within a closed 
range of the physiological attributes of their category, but there are examples of people who fall closer to the other end of the spectrum 
than they do within their own. 

For example, in humans, males are typically larger than females, but as we all know, some individual females are larger than individual 
males, and vice versa. As such, *the binary grouping of sex doesn’t really work; if you examine the scientific literature, you’ll find 
that there’s a broad consensus on the idea that sex is a continuum, a set of complex characteristics that we represent as a binary only 
for the sake of social convenience.* Now that we have that squared away...

*Gender refers to a set of social expectations and roles that are oriented around one sexual presentation.* In the west, we have two 
socially recognized genders, men and women, though we are currently reconciling the existence of binary-trans and non-binary people. *Our 
system is fixated on the common belief that gender and sex are more or less oriented around each other, that gendered characteristics 
(e.g., men being more mechanically predisposed, men being more sexually dominant or confident) are emergent from sexual characteristics, 
but you don't have to go too far back historically to find examples where this breaks apart.*

For example, there is, by no means, any intrinsic association between men having short hair and women having long hair. That expectation 
is not in any way genetically preordained. How could it be? Men's hair and women's hair is the same, genetically; the differences lie in 
how we choose to cut it. I can think of plenty of societies where it has been fashionable for men to have long hair and women to have 
short hair. Jesus had long hair. Flappers had short hair.

The "men like blue and women like pink" expectation is another example of this misconception. Historically, pink has been regarded as a 
bold and vibrant color, used even in battle to identify traditionally masculine strength and confidence. In contrast, blue has a more 
sedated tone. The modern color dynamic only came about because a toy company, back some hundred years ago, ran out of dye for the toys 
that they were making. Today, if you go into any toy store, you can see the girls' toys are incredibly pink, and the boys' toys are 
incredibly blue. The distinction there is so wild that it feels cartoon-ish. If you go back just a little bit in the past, this color 
paradigm didn't exist, but people today will treat it as if it's sacrosanct.

As we delve deeper into the histories of a variety of cultures across the globe, gender becomes increasingly arbitrary.

Dresses vs. suits? Men used to wear dresses. Suits haven't existed for that long, but there have been plenty of fashion trends of late 
where women are lauded for rocking tuxes. The fedora used to be considered a women's hat, and now it's a men's hat. Frankly, I'm not sure 
how that transition happened.

Men bedazzled themselves with earrings and facial piercings back in the day.

To top it off, there were/are many societies in which it was expected that women would be the sexually aggressive partners, including some 
ancient Greek city-states.

On to the next point, *gendered associations are not only arbitrary, but they are harmful.* This is where we get into gender roles and 
expectations. 

*I see value in the deconstruction of social hierarchies and taxonomies that I believe contribute to oppression. Not just to make those 
hierarchies good, or fine, or decent, but to destroy them. Something should have value to be kept.*

*What do we get from gender? What do we actually GET from it? I can't really think of any way in which gender, or the expectations 
surrounding it, actually help people. If something that gender offers us is valuable, we should be able to make the case for its value 
outside of the gender paradigm.* Take, for example, some things that a man has that are associated with his gender: his confidence, size, 
strength of the body, emotional willpower, etc. These things are gender-associated, but one could get all of these things without gender. 
Gender isn't necessary to teach one the importance of these things. One should not be confident, bold and eloquent because they're a man, 
they should be confident, bold and eloquent because it helps them to achieve their goals. 

*I can't think of any positive outcomes that only gender could lead us to, but I can think of some harm that gender imposes upon us.*

*See, gender can't really exist outside of gender roles. What is gender without gendered expectations? Any time you create a category for 
someone, the existence of the category implicitly reinforces the belief (both from those within and without that category) that people in 
that category should hold themselves to certain values. After all, there's no value in a category that has no meaning, right?*

Let's say you're a man. Men in America, and in many other societies, are hurt by the existence of gender in that gendered expectations 
discourage them from crying or showing emotion, which can lead to difficulties in communication, self-expression and relating to others. 
They're taught to be aggressive, competitive, and almost anti-social to an extent. As you can see, there are some pretty fucked up values 
that are associated with masculinity. We call them "toxic masculinity," elements of masculinity, which when reinforced in the minds of its 
constituents, lead to negative outcomes. 

There's toxic femininity too: a catty, bitchy hypersensitivity to others' social status, a pathological obsession with other people's 
social lives. These things aren't exclusive to femininity, nor are toxically masculine elements exclusive to men, but if you look at both 
ends of the spectrum, there are a ton of ways in which gendered expectations can reinforce harm in a person's self-perception and the ways 
in which they engage in a society.

*So, I ask you, why keep these categories? What benefit do they serve? As long as the categories exist, people are going to be held to 
expectations concerning the characteristics associated with those categories, and if there are no characteristics associated with those 
categories, then the categories themselves are meaningless.* 

If you want to say, "hey, girl power, but, by the way, girl can mean absolutely anything, there's no right or wrong way to be a girl," 
then why be a girl? One might say, "hey, I'm a boy, but, by the way, boy doesn't mean anything, there's no right or wrong way to be a boy. 
What does being a boy even mean? I don't know, but I'm a boy!" At that point, why be a boy? 

*Why keep the category if it doesn't mean anything? Categories are all socially constructed, they don't exist in nature, we build them 
through social rigor to serve a purpose, and if a category doesn't serve a purpose, but it could conceivably cause harm, why maintain that 
category? Why do it? What's the value? What's the purpose in maintaining a taxonomy that doesn't serve any social function, that serves no 
distinction, that doesn't reinforce any values, which doesn't reinforce any roles, which doesn't teach us anything, which doesn't give us 
anything. All it does, really, is serve for the potential of discrimination down the line.* 

As long as there are categories, people will discriminate based on those categories. As long as race exists, there will be racism. As long 
as sex exists, there will be sexism. As long as gender exists, there will be gender-based discrimination. Categories will always invite 
some form of discrimination, so the ones that we have, the ones that we keep, had best serve a valuable function.

So, what about trans people? Gender abolitionism gets mixed up in a lot of gross TERF arguments, because TERFs like to pretend that they 
don't care about gender, and then, in the next breath, talk about how femininity is this mystical, spiritual thing endowed to you at birth 
if you have a vagina, and that if you have a penis you can't be a woman because you're some sort of faker. See, TERFs lie when they call 
themselves gender abolitionists. I've never met a TERF who didn't express their fixation on gender. They pretend not to care about gender, 
if it means they get to bludgeon trans people. TERFs love gender, they crave it.

The reason why I want gender abolitionism is because I think people are hurt by gender. I think these categories cause measurable harm, 
and who do they harm more than trans people?

*Nobody. I ask you, who suffers more than trans people when it comes to misplaced, derogatory, harmful, pernicious expectations associated 
with gender? Who more? Nobody. Trans people are hurt more than anybody else in that regard. These people are the most harmed by the 
categories that I seek to eliminate.* 

A lot of TERFs will say this to trans women: "Hey, there's no such thing as gender, uhm, you're just a feminine boy. You can wear a dress 
and be a boy. You don't have to be a girl, you can never be a girl, why don't you just be a feminine boy?" 

*I propose to you a distinction, as an alternative to the TERF approach to gender abolitionism: the distinction, which some may call 
problematic, between transgender and transsexual people.*

*Transgender means to identify as any gender that is different from the gender that you were assigned at birth.* 

*By definition, non-binary people are trans, because they don't identify as the gender they were assigned at birth. The same goes for 
binary trans people.*

*Transsexual means that you are physiologically uncomfortable with the sexual characteristics associated with your body, and that you 
would like to change those characteristics.*

*These two categories often overlap, but not always. I know there are transgender people, trans women, trans men, and non-binary people, 
who have no interest whatsoever in changing their body. They're okay with their genitals. I know trans women with penises who are 
completely fine with that fact, and good on them! That person would be transgender, but not transsexual. They don't have a desire to 
change the sexual characteristics they were endowed with genetically, and that's every bit as valid as the alternative.*

*There are many transgender and transsexual people, who, in addition to making an effort to socially present as the gender with which they 
identify, also want to change their body through hormones and surgery. I also know a few people who are transsexual but not transgender, 
who are every bit as valid as the aforementioned categories. Some non-transgender individuals take HRT because they like the idea of 
altering some of their sexual characteristics, independent of being transgender.*

*In a gender-abolished world, transsexual people would continue to exist, but transgender people would, by definition, no longer exist. If 
gender no longer exists as a construct, you cannot be transgender. There is no gender, so you can't be transgender.* 

If you are born with a penis and wish to behave or present in a way that would traditionally be considered feminine, you aren't 
transcending anything in a gender-abolished world because "feminine" no longer exists. When you're born in a gender-abolished society, 
there's no expectation for how you'll dress, walk, talk or behave, beyond the absolute baseline physiological expectations that one might 
associate with one who is born with a penis or a vagina (e.g, for penis-bearers, the miraculous ability to urinate from a standing 
position). 

There would be no expectations as to how you would present yourself, identify, orient yourself sexually or interact with other people, at 
least not based on your genitalia; however, there would still be transsexual people. It is conceivable, in a gender-abolished society, 
that a person could have boobs and NOT want boobs, and take the action to remove them. That wouldn't be a gendered decision, rather a 
decision about one's sexual characteristics, and those people would be transsexual.

*If we recognize the transgender/transsexual distinction, I think it's easy to see that gender abolitionism doesn't come at the expense of 
trans people. If anything, gender abolitionism will help trans people are the ones who would be most thoroughly liberated by this, because 
trans people, above all others, experience the suffering associated with jumping between these arbitrary, binary categories.* 

With the removal of these categories, every single person, free of social pressures, free of oppression, free of coercion, can make the 
personal decision to live their life authentically, presenting, dressing, speaking and engaging with the world in the ways that make them 
feel most comfortable. Some people, who have transsexual dysphoria, can still chop their dicks off, or get a pair of boobies. That's cool, 
nothing about gender abolitionism stands in the way of that.

This, to me, seems like the best way, the most humane, reasonable way to address the harm done through gender without losing any good, any 
social utility. What do we lose? Who is harmed? I don't think anyone is harmed. In my opinion, the world would be a better place if we 
slowly made steps towards de-legitimizing gender as a construct.

Think about how important gender was in the United State just 70 years ago. The man-woman divide in America was presented as some 
existential, divine rift, and all of society was oriented around the distinctions between those two categories. It's wild. It's crazy. 
Nowadays we've gotten a lot better about this, but it's not far enough. Why don't we keep pushing they envelope?

Why don't we keep pushing until we recognize, "hey, you can be a man and be wispy and effeminate," or, "hey, you can be a woman and be 
brusk and masculine." *We keep pushing until "man" doesn't mean anything and "woman doesn't mean anything, until we're left with two 
categories that mean nothing, that have no distinction, that serve no value, and then we, slowly, recognize that we don't need them 
anymore.*

This process will be extremely long-term, as it has been over the past 70 years. It won't take a year, or a decade, or even a century, but 
it's a long-term goal that I believe in very sincerely, because I don't like unnecessary, harmful social constructs.
